In this video, we're going to
look at how we can explore
correlations in our data
using scatter charts
and bubble charts.
Rohan has a suspicion that
there is a relationship between
a country's per capital
GDP and their emissions,
and he'd like to
explore that visually.
Now we have the per capita GDP,
and the per capita
emissions data.
What we're going to do,
is show that data
on a scatter chart.
Usually when create a column
chart or a line chart,
we only provide a numeric
value for the y-axis.
The x-axis just has text
labels or a year label.
But in this situation,
we actually want a
numeric value for both.
We are going to
start by selecting
two columns with numeric data in,
and that's going to be our
GDP and our emissions.
What Excel will do is use
the first column that you
select as your x-axis,
and the second column that
you select as your y-axis.
But obviously you can
swap these around.
I'm going to press
"Control", "Shift",
"Down Arrow" and then
just scrolling up,
I'm going to come to my
Insert Tab on my ribbon.
I'm going to come to charts,
and we're going to look for
the Insert Scatter
or Bubble Chart.
Then to begin with,
we just going to start with
a straightforward scattershot and
I want to make that
a fair bit bigger.
You can see Rohan's suspicions
are largely correct.
We can definitely see
an upward trajectory
as our GDP increases,
so do our emissions.
We can pretty easily spot these
are the GDP per capita values,
because they're the big numbers.
But for somebody coming
new into this chart,
it would be very helpful if
we had labels on our axes.
Let's do that.
We're going to come to
our Chart Elements.
We're going to turn
Axis Titles on,
and then we just come
and edit the title.
I'm going to triple-click
on the first one,
and that's our Emissions.
Then I'm going to triple-click in
my horizontal axis and
that's my GDP per capita.
While I'm at it, I'll
give my chart a label.
I'm going to triple-click
up there as well,
and this is going to be GDP
per capita versus emissions.
Now one of the downsides is
that with a scatter chart,
we don't automatically get
labels for our data points.
But in the newer
versions of Excel,
you can actually add those
labels if you want to.
We've got quite a
lot of data here,
so it's going to look very messy,
but I'd like you to
see how to do it.
Again, we're going to come
to our Chart Elements.
I'm going to turn
our Data Labels on,
but it's used the
emissions values
which is not what we want.
If you come to your panel
and if you don't see
your panel there,
just click the
black arrow outside
Data Labels and choose "More
Options" and that will bring you
into your options for
your Data Labels.
I'm going to click "Text
Options", "Label Options",
un-select "y-Value" and we're
going to get a value
from cells instead.
Now we can just click on
our first country
and press "Control",
"Shift", "Down Arrow" and "Okay".
Page up a couple of times,
and you can see it has actually
added the country names.
As I said though, we have
so many countries that it's
getting messy in here.
But if you just need
a sneak peek or
if you had a lot less data,
it is really handy to know.
All right, we're
actually going to
switch those labels off.
Now another piece
of data that Rohan
would like to show on this chart,
is the population for
each of these countries.
A scatter plot can only
represent an X and a Y value.
But there's a newer chart
called a bubble chart,
which should also allow
you to represent
a third variable,
and it shows that
as the bubble size.
The smaller values
get small bubbles,
and the larger values
get large bubbles.
That's what we can do
with our population data.
With your chart selected,
we are going to come
to Change Chart Type
and we're going to choose
a nice 3-D Bubble,
but you could choose
either 2D or 3D,
and we're going to say, "Okay".
Now at the moment, it
looks very strange
because all of our bubbles
are the same size.
So we need now to tell Excel
where to get the third
set of values from.
We're going to do that by
coming to Select Data.
You'll see we have a single
series at the moment.
We're going to edit that series,
and the bubble size has been
set to one for all the bubbles,
so we're just going to
remove that information.
Instead, we are going to
select our population.
So click "D4" and control
shift down arrow,
and then click "OK"
and "OK." Page up a
couple of times again,
and that's looking much better.
But these two massive
bubbles over here,
which I think we can
guess are China and
India, are dominating everything.
We have another option,
and that is to scale our bubbles.
Just select one bubble,
doesn't matter which,
come to Format Data Series
and choose your options.
Then we're going to
scale our bubble to
50 percent of its original
size and press "Enter".
That's obviously made our
chart a lot easier to read.
Now, we need a few more tweaks.
Let's look at Qatar over here.
It's a bit of an extreme value.
In fact, you'll only
see two countries,
Norway and Qatar, actually have
a GDP per capita of over 80,000.
We are going to change
our axis so we can get
a better view of the
majority of the data.
Select your horizontal axis,
come to your axis options,
and we're going to
make that go from
zero because we don't
need a negative.
Then we're just going to remove
the one in front of that,
80,000, and that's made the
data already more readable.
Then we're going to do something
similar for our y-axis.
We'll start that at
minus one to give space
for our bubbles and
then take that to 31,
which will let Trinidad
and Tobago fit in.
But scale the axis so
it's a little better.
We can now see our data
much more clearly.
Now, an ethics note here,
you should put a note under
your graph that you've
removed Norway and Qatar
by adjusting the axis,
because we don't
want to pretend that
those two values don't exist.
Let's make one final
tweak to this.
We're going to come up to
our chart designs and we're
going to choose an option that
makes our bubbles
that much clearer.
So have a look at these with
your bubble charts in particular,
as some of them will highlight
the bubbles much better.
That's looking really good.
But without the chart labels,
[inaudible] had another idea.
He would like to call
the bubbles by region.
Now at the moment, this is
just one single series.
So you'd have to use all sorts of
tedious procedures to try and
recall each bubble manually,
which is not going to
be very efficient.
But what you can do with
both scatter and bubble charts
is you can add multiple series.
If you add each region
as its own series,
then you can color-code them.
So what [inaudible] has done
to the right over here,
is actually prepared
the region data
in five separate blocks.
He's actually already created
the bubble chart over here.
What he did was he started by
creating the bubble
chart just for Africa,
and then he's gone and manually
added each of the other blocks.
There's just one
more left to add,
and that's euro, and we're
going to look at how to do that.
Select your chart, come
up to select data,
you'll see that there
are four series
that have been added so far.
We're going to click" Add" and
we're going to add Europe.
Our X values are our GDP,
so we're just going
to select that.
Our Y values, and just
be careful to remove
what's already there.
Our emissions and
our bubble size is
our population, and click "OK".
Now, you'll notice
that Europe has now
been added as a red series.
One final little tweak.
Africa is pale green
and you'll see
as being hidden by
the Asian countries,
which are so large here.
The way it works is
the most recently added
series goes on top,
but you can re-sequence them.
So I'm going to click
on "Africa" and
just click the down
arrow to move it down.
Now Africa is coming
on top of Asia,
and we can see it a
little bit more clearly.
I'm going to click "OK".
Brilliant. Come back
into our chart,
and let's just add a legend,
and I'm going to put that
at the bottom of the chart.
Now we have a completed
bubble charts.
So scatter and bubble
chart's excellent for
showing correlations between
values in your data.